# Behavioral and ERP Evidence supporting Selection and Integration in Orientation Averaging

Abstract:
Ensemble perception enables us to efficiently encode statistical properties from multiple similar objects as a strategy to overcome the bottleneck of our visual system. Yet, despite being widely reported in multiple levels of visual features, its cognitive and attentional mechanism remains disputable. In one view, it was suggested that distributed attention activates an automatic integration mechanism that gives rise to the ensemble percept, whereas the opposing view argued for it as a controlled selection mechanism that relies on selective attention. Experiment 1 examined these two proposed attentional mechanisms by manipulating attention to either 1 orientation stimulus or an ensemble set of 9 elements. Our behavioral findings argued for the necessity of distributed attention in forming an accurate average percept while showing traces of selective attention employment. Experiment 2 compared the event-related potentials evoked when viewing 1 orientation stimulus and an ensemble set of 9 orientations. Both the N170 and frontal selection positivity components were activated when an ensemble set was presented, which reflected the involvement of integration and selection, respectively. Across two experiments, our behavioral and ERP evidence concur with the involvement of both integration and selection processes in orientation averaging. We argue that postulating perceptual averaging to have a clear-cut dichotomy between the employment of solely distributed or selection attention might be simplistic. It is unlikely that a comprehensive mechanism would have been achieved by omitting neither the selection nor the integration mechanism. Further research effort might explore the selection pattern, integration mechanism, and more importantly, their interaction.

